***Monitoring and Feedback

Health care is a field that has significant potential to utilize the behavioural economics approach, one of whose leading applications is monitoring and feedback. Monitoring and feedback programs contribute to the improvement of health care services mostly through change in the behaviours of either hospital staff or that of patients.  The underlying mechanism by which monitoring and feedback creates change in the behaviour is “reactivity” and it says that people may change behaviour when they are being observed (Orlowska, 1990). In fact, reactivity is considered as a threat to the validity of behavioural observation as Haynes and Horn (1982) suggest, because it will probably cause modification in the behaviour of the subjects. However, in case of monitoring as a method to improve health care services in the hospitals, modification in the behaviour of subjects -i.e. hospital staff or patients- is indeed, what is desired. Sykes (1978) explains the concept of reactivity by introducing the concept of “observer’s effect”, which is the change in the behaviour of the subject as a consequence of the observer’s presence. 

In this part of the canon, the focus of interest regarding the implementation of monitoring and feedback programs in healthcare will be more about hospital staff’s behaviour and patients’ behaviour in attending their appointments.There are many studies aimed at improving staff’s behaviour and accordingly service quality in hospitals through implementation of monitoring and feedback mechanisms. Analysing the effect of monitoring and feedback on hospital staff’s behaviour regarding things like hand hygiene and surgical safety checklists is a common practice, because these have huge consequences for people’s health who visit the hospitals. Millions of people get health care-associated infections in hospitals every year, which in turn cause significant number of deaths. Hand hygiene, for example, is a crucial factor in preventing health care-associated infections as acknowledged by the WHO (Walker et al., 2014). One of the studies dealing with hand hygiene compliance of the staff in hospitals is a study by Armellino and his colleagues (2011) “Replicating changes in hand hygiene in a surgical intensive care unit with remote video auditing and feedback”. This study looks at the effect of using RVA (Remote Video Auditing) in the surgical intensive care units and feedback on the hand hygiene compliance rates of the hospital staff. During a 4-week period of monitoring the staff via RVA, the hand hygiene compliance rate on average was 30.42%. After the 4th week, real time feedback was combined with RVA and in this post-feedback period hand hygiene compliance rates exceeded 80% on average.  It’s concluded that RVA combined with feedback generated a significant and sustained improvement in hand hygiene compliance rates (Armellino, 2013).   A very similar study conducted by Walker and colleagues (2014) assessing the effectiveness of a new hand hygiene monitoring program also found out that the program showed significant increase in hand hygiene compliance. In addition to the compliance in hand hygiene, Overdyk and colleagues (2015) carried out a study that evaluated the effect of remote video auditing together with reel time feedback on the compliance with the safety processes such as  surgical checklist. They too concluded that improved efficiency and compliance to safety protocols can result from direct observation, measurement and immediate feedback to the operation team (Overdyk et al., 2015).

Another issue where feedback mechanisms are made use of in healthcare, is unattended appointments in hospitals. Patients not keeping up with their appointments has serious costs for the hospital, since this causes significant losses in revenues and decrease in the service quality and patient satisfaction. A study conducted by Martin, Bassi, Dunbar-Rees (2012), looking at the effect of certain methods on reducing the number of missed appointments, concludes that the exposure to social norms as the number of appointments that were attended, proved to be the most effective method among others. This was basically done by communicating on posters or on screens the number of patients who kept up with their appointments in the previous periods.  The exposure to right norms functions in a way similar to feedback mechanisms and it indeed reduced the number of missed appointments by 31.7% (Martin et al., 2012).
